and here's matt hancock the health
secretary with the latest briefing good
afternoon and welcome to today's downing
street coronavirus briefing and i'm
joined by deputy chief medical officer
professor jonathan van tam and by dr
susan hopkins from
phe and nhs test and trace and since we
spoke on friday
i'm absolutely delighted that we've
reached the milestone
of vaccinating 20 million people across
the uk it is a magnificent achievement
first slide please and as of yesterday
20 million 275 451 people
have received a jab and i want to pay
tribute to all the teams
involved across the whole of the uk
who've been delivering
the largest and fastest vaccination
program
in british history and that we've been
able to do this
and that we've been able to move so much
faster than any
other similar sized nation has depended
on a
huge number of people it is not an
accident it's
down to insight and hard work for the
last year
this team has shared a common mission
which is to deliver us
a vaccine as fast as safely
possible we've got used to saying thank
you to people who've made it
happen but i just want to call out a
couple in particular
firstly the regulator the mhra
who have remained tough and rigorous
throughout yet
flexible so that it's safety not
bureaucracy
that they focus on and they have proved
themselves to be in my view
the best medical regulator in the world
and we
are all very grateful next the vaccines
task force
their combination of academic excellence
with private sector entrepreneurialism
and civil service grip has forged
a team of remarkable capability
which is a model for how governments can
get stuff done
in the future the scientists the
pharmaceutical companies the armed
forces everyone involved in the delivery
effort from the leadership of the nhs
through to every local volunteer and
you the british people for sticking to
the rules
and for the remarkable enthusiasm to get
a jab
which makes me really proud recent
figures show
94 of those eligible
have said that they either have had a
jab or will get a jab when their call
comes
94 and this is so important because each
and every
jab makes us all safer every time a
friend sends me a message
with a picture of them having had their
jab and this happens to me a lot
i know that we're all one step safer
safer
and we're all one step closer to
returning to normality
so it is fantastic the enthusiasm that
people are showing
and we've still got a long way to go so
let's stick at it
today we have some new data to show on
the
effectiveness of the vaccine both its
real world effect
that we can now see in the data and
some new analytical research that we're
publishing
that shows how it's saving lives and
this
is being published in a paper by public
health england and others
right now first let's look at the real
world
data next slide please
if you look at the number of new cases
as we described on friday the number of
new cases is falling
but the rate of decline has slowed this
shows
how we all need to keep sticking to the
rules
let's not blow it now however next slide
please
the number of hospitalizations is
falling faster
even better among the age groups who
were vaccinated
first so the older age groups the fall
in hospitalizations is faster
than in the younger age groups who are
still yet to get a jab
this is a sign that the vaccine is
working
next slide please but where you can
really see it
is in the data on deaths
we can see that the number of deaths
each day is thankfully falling
much much faster than in the first peak
and again as you can see from this slide
it's falling faster in the
over 80s who got the job first than in
the
under 80s final slide please and taken
together
this difference in the data between
older and younger groups
shows a vaccine gap and you can just see
it starting to emerge here
over february this is a gap between
the rate of decline in older and younger
groups where the older groups were
obviously vaccinated first
and you're seeing that their the rate of
decline
in terms of the number of people dying
each day is going
faster amongst the over 80s
and this shows in the real world across
the uk
right now that the vaccine is helping
both to protect the nhs
and to save lives and these real world
effects are backed up by some exciting
new data
that shows that a single shot of either
the oxford astrazeneca
vaccine or of the pfizer vaccine works
against severe infection among the over
70s
with a more than 80 percent reduction in
hospitalizations
this is extremely good news in fact
the detailed data show that the the
protection that you get
from catching covid 35 days
after a first jab is even slightly
better
for the oxford jab than for pfizer
albeit both results are clearly very
strong
and professor van tam is going to set
out more details in a moment
these results may also help to explain
why the number of covert admissions to
intensive care units
among people over 80 in the uk have
dropped to single figures
in the last couple of weeks which is
something i know that we all welcome
this is seriously encouraging it shows
the power of science
and what it means for you is that when
the call comes
get the jab the evidence shows that it
will protect you
and protect others and i can formally
announce that we're now inviting
the over 60s to be vaccinated all part
of our national effort
to ensure everybody is offered the
vaccine
every adult by the end of july
to do that and to make sure our vaccine
program is always kept up to date
we are making sure that the program has
the funds that it needs to do all of
this incredible work
at the budget on wednesday the
chancellor will set out
1.65 billion pounds worth of new
government funding to reinforce our
vaccine rollout across all parts of the
uk
as more of us are protected against the
virus we can gradually replace the
safety that comes from the restrictions
that we have to impose
with the safety that comes from the jab
and part of that funding will go towards
further vaccine testing and development
to make sure we are as fast
and effective in developing the next
generation of covid vaccines
including vaccines against new variants
as we were with the existing ones and
there's a huge amount of under
work underway to ensure that we can
develop
vaccines against variants as fast
as safely possible finally i want to
turn
to a different subject at the six cases
of the variant of concern
that was first identified in manaus in
brazil
that we have identified here in the uk
three in scotland and three in england
we know that five of these people
quarantined at home
as they were legally required to do
we've been in contact with them
and their families and we're grateful to
them for understanding the seriousness
of the situation
we're putting in place surge testing in
south gloucestershire as a precaution
and i urge everyone to remain vigilant
one of the six completed a test but did
not
successfully complete contact details
and we're therefore
asking anyone who took a test on the
12th or 13th of february
but hasn't received the result back to
please get in touch
by calling 119 in england wales
or northern ireland or in scotland oh
303 2713 and dr
hopkins will give more information about
this effort in a moment
we identified these cases thanks to the
uk's advanced
sequencing capabilities we know about
them because of the work of nhs test and
trace
and scientists around the world are now
working hard to get ahead of some of
these new
variants looking at how much a third
vaccine dose
could tackle these evolving mutations if
it's necessary
much as we tackle mutations from flu
each year but for now tackling this
disease rests with
every single one of us it's important to
remember that no matter what variant it
is
covid spreads in the same way through
social contact between people the steps
that we can
all take to stop its spread are the same
to stay at home
to take vital steps like hands face and
space
and make sure we observe the basics
letting fresh air in and keeping to the
rules on social distancing
and that's how we can keep ourselves
safe and protect the people around us
and if we do that
as surely as spring follows winter
there will be brighter days ahead i'm
now going to turn to
dr hopkins to set out more about the p1
variant
and then to professor van tan on more
details
of this excellent research into the
impact of the vaccine
susan thank you secretary of state as
has widely been reported
this weekend we identified six cases of
a new variant of concern in the uk
three cases in england and three in
scotland
this variant called p1 has been
identified
widely in manaus brazil and also in
other countries across the world
we are tracking it closely because it
shares some important mutations with the
variant first identified in south africa
such as e484k and n501y
unusual names i understand these and
other mutations
are associated with reduced impact of
antibodies against the virus in
laboratory experiments
the current vaccines have not yet been
studied against this variant
and we will need to wait further
clinical and trial data to understand
the vaccine effectiveness against this
variant
in the meantime it is important that we
track cases
of this new variant as closely as
possible in order to limit
its spread in the uk of the cases found
two are from a single household in the
south gloucester area
one of these individuals traveled back
from brazil and has subsequently
isolated effectively at home
the household developed symptoms shortly
afterwards and household members
went forward got tested the sample was
sequenced through our
our sequencing laboratories and reported
to be this p1 variant
as the secretary of state has said we
are doing additional surge testing
in parts of south gloucestershire as a
highly precautionary measure
and we urge people in that part of the
country to come forward for testing
i would like to stress though that these
individuals have
followed all of the current protocols in
terms of self-isolation
both on their return from the uk but
also
after they've received positive test
results and developed symptoms
we're also contacting individuals who
were on the swiss air flight
lx 318 traveling from zurich into london
on the 10th of february to provide
public health advice
and to test them and their households
more than 90
of the flight have already been
contacted through the details they left
on the passenger locator forum
if you were a passenger on that flight
and have not been contacted
please call 0-117-450-3175
to arrange a test for you and your
household contacts
there is also a third unlinked case this
individual did not complete their test
registration
cards so follow-up details were not
available to the test and trace teams
this is an extremely rare event probably
less than 1 000 of individuals who have
a test
through the community testing services
we cannot trace in this way
but we know this is more frequent about
0.3
in those that do home tests or have
tests through the surge testing service
we're in the process of doing everything
we can to track down this individual
who we believe would have taken the test
on the 12th or 13th of january or
february
we're especially looking for individuals
who may have taken a test
through surge testing those tests that
the local authorities hand out
door-to-door
and haven't managed to complete their
online form to either complete their
online
form or call one of the numbers that i'm
going to tell you about
these numbers are 119 in england and
0-300 303-2713
in scotland as soon as possible thank
you
thank you very much dr hopkins and now
i'm going to turn to professor vantam to
set out more details on the
uh uh on the good news in terms of the
impact
of the vaccines thank you secretary of
state
and a few moments ago
public health england with partners
from across the four devolved nations
of the uk published a new report
summarizing vaccine effectiveness to
date
as part of the the england and
england programme now
thank you for bearing with us because it
has taken a while
for that signal to stabilize so we have
enough confidence to
give you some data but equally
it is still remarkably fast and a credit
to our public health agencies
that they've been able to do it in this
very short period of time
since our vaccination program began and
i particularly
want to mention jamie lopez bernal
mary ramsey nick andrews and their
colleagues
who have done really an enormous amount
of hard work
to get us to where we are today in terms
of our data understanding
so the data i'm going to lay out for you
are all
data pertaining to vaccine effectiveness
after the first dose of vaccine
and you have to be very careful about
the outcome measures that you
are describing and therefore i'll go
through them
very carefully the first outcome measure
is outcome against infections
defined in this case as people who
are ill with symptoms and who come
forwards and take
a positive covid test and the data
are for individuals aged 70 years of age
and over and for both vaccines
we see vaccine effectiveness against
illness after the first dose
of approximately 60 percent
that was measured 28 to 34 days
after the vaccine had been given but in
the case of the
pfizer vaccine that effect is seen to be
sustained
into the 35 day plus time bracket
for astrazeneca in the 35-day plus time
bracket
there is an early sign that that might
still be increasing
to around 70 percent but the
confidence intervals on that are very
wide
and that is a less certain figure but
the figure i
can be certain of is 60 percent
effectiveness
against illness
now obviously there are still
unfortunately because no vaccine is a
hundred percent effective
people who become ill despite having had
that first dose of vaccine
but if you look at the then reductions
in hospitalization
that are occurring on top
in those people who still become
infected
and you add that to the fact that people
who are not infected
can't by definition be hospitalized with
covid
what that brings you to is an overall
effect
for both vaccines in public health terms
that they are now preventing 80 percent
of reducing the likelihood of
hospitalization
by 80 percent after one dose
so that's the second outcome the
hospitalizations data
and the third outcome is mortality and
because of the fact that mortality takes
longer to measure
deaths unfortunately from covid take
longer to occur
after hospitalizations at this point
we only have data for the pfizer vaccine
where the the likelihood of mortality
is being reduced by 85 percent
in those over 70 year olds so
that's really the summary there's a lot
more detail
in the phe paper which is online
but i think you'll agree with me that
although
these data pertain just to the
70 plus age group at the moment and our
vaccine
program moves on with really significant
pace
now as we move into the lower age groups
it shows us gives us those first
glimpses
of how if we are patient and we
give this vaccine program time to have
its full effect
it is going to hopefully take us into a
very different world
in the next few months but we have to be
patient
we have to push on with the vaccine
program
and most importantly when you are called
for your place in the vaccine queue it's
important that you come forwards
and have that first dose and when called
for your second dose
and some people will be being called
back quite soon now for their second
doses
to come forwards for that too thank you
secretary
great stuff professor van tam thank you
very much indeed
our first questions are from members of
the public and the first by video
is from claire from selby
why is there such disparity across the
country in accessing the vaccine
in my local area group 7 is being
vaccinated before group 6
and i have fit and healthy friends age
60 who have had the jab
other areas are starting over 50 soon
why are group 6 the clinically
vulnerable with chronic ill health being
left behind
and should the vaccines not be dispensed
equally
thanks very much glad so we are working
incredibly hard to get these
vaccines out and making sure that we
both deliver according to the order set
out by the
joint committee on vaccinations and
immunizations
and also do that in a way that doesn't
lead to any vaccine being wasted
for instance we know that the pfizer jab
has to be used within
a few days of it coming out of the
freezer
so the vaccine centers are allowed if
the vaccine is otherwise going to be
wasted
to make sure that it's used on a on a
reserve list which
might include people who are from the
next category down
so that does happen occasionally we're
essentially
balancing the need for speed
with the need for sticking by the the
rank
ordering what i can tell you though is
that we are getting through all those
groups and we're running at
around half a million a day just under
on average
over the last week and this means that
if you are in group six
and you haven't yet been called you
won't have to wait for long
because we're really rattling through
that group as we speak
um so i of course i understand the the
concern here
it is a matter of balancing the
practical operational need for speed and
some flexibility
with trying to stick by the the rank
ordering
um jv team unless you have anything to
do with that thank you thanks very much
claire a very important question i
appreciate it uh next question is from
aleister from norwich
concerning the government's dates are
hopefully reintroducing public freedoms
are there any specific numbers of daily
cases deaths or hospital admissions that
they feel we have to be below
in order to guarantee those freedoms if
so what are they
great question alistair the answer is no
there are not specific thresholds
and the reason for that is that the
prime minister set out four tests and
all four matter
but some of them can't be quantified in
numbers
so the four tests include of course that
hospitalizations
and deaths are coming down also that
there isn't a surge in cases that might
risk hospitalizations
going up in the future also that the
vaccine program
is rolling out well and finally that
there isn't a new variant of control
of concern that puts all this at risk
and so the challenge is that
we have to balance all four of these
metrics
and the some of them can be quantified
like the number of hospitalizations and
deaths
but others can't like the impact of a
variant of concern because it depends on
the nature of that variant
so that's why we haven't put precise
numbers on it
but we make a judgment based on these
four
uh these four tests as to whether we can
take each step
in the road map when the time comes uh
thanks aleister
next question is from laura koonsberg at
the bbc laura
thank you very much indeed secretary of
state someone carrying the brazilian
variant was able to
disappear weeks after the variant was
first detected because the government
hadn't yet got round to introducing
quarantine hotels do you believe that
that delay
will have put people at risk and
professor van tam if i can ask you about
the
very um effective news about the vaccine
which sounds very impressive
in the real world how would you describe
the impact that these kinds of results
suggest the vaccine might have
and what kind of difference could that
make in the weeks to come to what we're
all experiencing
uh thanks laura two very important
questions the answer to your first is no
we had already quarantined in place
and in fact we'd already put in place a
ban on direct travel from
brazil and also that if those who aren't
either citizens or resident here
couldn't come
and all the evidence is that the five
cases that we
know about followed those quarantine
rules
and that i hope is very reassuring to
people and
there is no evidence that the sixth case
and did not follow those
quarantine rules um we need to obviously
get in contact with the person in
question also this positive test was on
the 12th or 13th of february we think uh
and that was obviously over two weeks
ago and we haven't seen any further
knock-on transmissions in the data
that we obviously monitor very very
closely and we now
we now sequence around a third of all of
the positive
tests so all of that points to
the work that's that's been done and the
system that was in place
uh having managed to control this
but obviously since then we've
introduced further
and stricter measures the hotel
quarantine as you say
uh to to strengthen this system further
uh in answer to your second question
i'll go straight to jay
to professor van tan yeah thanks for the
question laura
so we've given first doses now
to more than 20 million people on the
jcvi
priority groups but we need to remember
that that still means
there are another 15 million people
roughly who need their first dose
and then it will be important to go back
progressively as we go through from now
really to give second doses
so it is still all going to take time
until we can apply the results that i've
described to you
in a more generalized way in the
population
but in time i expect the vaccine to
lower levels of disease across the
country
i expect it to reduce the likelihood
because we're starting from the elderly
and the most vulnerable
that infections that are present can get
into
the older and more vulnerable population
and i expect for the individuals who
have been vaccinated
even if they come across the virus
and even if they are infected
with the virus i expect the likelihood
of them suffering severe consequences
not to be eliminated but to be lessened
over time in other words the ratio of
mild cases to severe cases
should increase in favor of milder cases
as time goes by so there's a lot to look
forwards to it's very tempting to just
go right we've seen the results that
means the problems fixed
the problem isn't fixed yet but we
definitely have identified
a way of fixing the problem and the
early data
show us how to do that and where to
advance from here
thanks very much indeed anything to add
susan
next question from romillyweeks at itv
romney
health secretary you've said that one of
the ways to stop the spread of this new
variant is to stay at home and yet
you're about to open schools and start
the process
of unlocking how likely is it that this
new
variant could derail that process and if
i could ask uh dr hopkins as well
what is the likelihood that there are
already many more than
six cases of the new variant in the uk
and the prime minister has said today
that there's no evidence that
the existing vaccines are not effective
against the new variant
how confident are you that they are
effective
thanks very much romney three vital
questions the first one
on schools we do not think that there's
any need to change the approach on
schools for monday because of this
new variant and the reason we think that
is that
five of in five of the six cases um
we have been in contact with them three
in scotland
where of course public health scotland
takes the lead and two in
england in south gloucestershire where
public health england
have take the lead and they've been in
contact with these cases
and we have a high degree of confidence
that they followed quarantine
as they are they were legally required
to do
in the case of the sixth case of course
we're
we as you know we're trying to track
down uh this
individual but we also have not seen any
further
community spread and so whilst obviously
it's something that we should be
all vigilant about and it reinforces the
need for people to follow the rules
as they are now it doesn't change our
assessment of
the of the road map right now not least
because our goal
is to uh contain uh this
transmission to just these six people
but we will obviously
be uh be looking out for that very very
carefully
yeah i would just add so we've sequenced
almost a 150
000 uh cases of this infection since
this
2021. these are the only six cases that
we've identified
we've also working with both the ons and
react studies
where they get a representative
proportion of the population sequenced
and we have not found the
any p1 cases in that that's all very
reassuring but we're still
on guard and increasing the proportion
of the cases that get sequenced on a
week by week basis
and clearly we will manage and look to
see if there is any other cases
in the community that's why we want this
individual to come forward
so we can ensure that their contacts
are tested that we review and look at
everything about this case
and can find out whether there are any
associated cases that need any further
work done to them
thanks very much romilly um the next
question from uh thomas more
at sky secretary of state you know there
is this missing case but not
who or where or whether they've
self-isolated
how is it that after two months of a
tough lockdown and just one week before
it starts to lift such
a concerning new variant has been
allowed to slip
through the net and professor van tam
level with the british public
is there any prospect of a foreign
holiday this summer when new variants
are crossing our borders
and there's still no vaccine with
inbuilt universal protection
against the evolving virus thanks thomas
well
i i see it the other way around it's
because of the extraordinary capability
of
nhs test and trace that we've been able
to identify
these cases and in particular there is a
high chance that the identification of
the sixth
case came through the surge testing that
we put in
around communities where we were
previously looking for
uh for other variants of concern and we
don't know that for sure
but without the huge surveillance
that we have in terms of the testing
capability
and then the ability to sequence that we
wouldn't know about this
and by sequencing now around 30 percent
of cases that means that we do have a
very good
uh survey to be able to spot
variants of concern like this but as you
say it is critical
that people continue to follow the rules
because
that limits the spread of new variants
in the same way that it limits the
spread
of the existing uh variant that is the
what infects most people in the country
thankfully with
decreasing rates susan i would just like
to add that sometimes it's it's really
important that
people may have got the test and then
not realized how to complete it or may
have lost their
their form to complete it 119 is
standing by in england
and also the scottish number is
available on the website so we are
imploring people to come forward if they
haven't got their test results
and we will help you find and reconnect
you with that test results
and therefore be able to stop any
transmission
uh thanks very much um sarah bosley from
the guardian
thank you very much minister um so we
know that
the p1 virus obviously brazil is on the
red list of countries where people have
to quarantine as a result
of coming back but um labour is saying
that the p1 variants also been found in
germany
the pharaoh islands italy japan republic
of korea and the usa
and none of those are on the red list so
doesn't this mean
that the uk's borders are in fact
incredibly porous
and the red lists are not the way to go
about this since variants can travel
so easily and secondly can i just ask
you about the very positive news from
phe about the vaccines and the
astrozenica vaccine
in particular do you think minister that
this could actually put paid
to the skepticism we've seen in europe
about this vaccine
well thank you very much i'll answer
those two and then i'll ask jvt to
answer the previous question from
thomas moritz sky which i um i i cut you
off before you're about to
to answer that so um the first point is
that
the proportion of cases that are
variants of concern
in some other countries like germany are
exceptionally low
in the same way that the proportion of
cases here that are variants of concern
are exceptionally low
but there are some other countries like
brazil and
south africa where the variance of
concern
is the dominant variant and that is a
material consideration in terms of the
uh the the red list but what i'd say
further to that is
home quarantine is required for
everybody
and we have a requirement for a
pre-departure test
and then a test at day two and day eight
so we have these strong
safeguards against the uh
against these variants that are in place
uh that are in place now
um on the second question i hope that
people
look at the data that we've published
today
and see the rigor of the science
and read from that the same as i read
from it
which is that both of the vaccines that
are in the use
in the uk right now are extremely
effective
after one dose there is some further
evidence in the paper
of further effectiveness after two doses
and that's yet more good news and and
there
are on some measures uh there are signs
that the
oxford astrazeneca vaccine is slightly
more effective
than the pfizer vaccine but the fisa
vaccine on these data is also
extremely effective so i absolutely hope
that
right around the world people study
these data
and understand what they mean which is
that
getting the oxford astrazeneca jab or
getting
the pfizer jab is the right thing to do
and it could save your life
jvt yeah thank you so i'll go back to
just before i answer
add to that um sarah i'll just go back
to thomas moore's question he asked me
to level
with um level with him and and the
british people
about summer holidays and you know look
i think we are still
as you can see from today's news um
we are still in a zone of great
uncertainty
about what the virus will do next
on top of that many of the vaccination
programs
in europe which is a place where we
frequently go on holiday abroad
are running behind ours and clearly
whether we can go
on holiday abroad to places such as
europe
depends upon what other countries will
say
and do in terms of foreign tourism
so that's the best i can do to level
with you
i'm not going to give you a firm answer
because i genuinely don't think there is
one at this
point i think i would just say that
there has to be great uncertainty at the
moment
on the point about um the astrazeneca
vaccine
and non-adoption by many countries
in terms of its use in the over 65
population that was driven by the fact
that there were relatively small amounts
of data on the over 65s in
the clinical trials available at the at
that point in time
for the az vaccine and our
technical advisory committee the jcvi um
took a view which i share that it was
not
immunologically plausible that the
vaccine would work
up to uh in the in the age range 18 to
um you know to 55 years of age which is
a lot of where a lot of where the data
ran out and then kind of not work
in those older age groups we took a view
that
it almost certainly would work
the phe data have clearly vindicated
that approach today and um
you know i'm not here to criticize other
countries
but to say that i think in time the data
emerging from our program
will speak for itself and other
countries will
doubtless be very interested in it
thank you sir professor van tan very uh
diplomatic
um i i just add one other thing that
it's important to read
from this data which is that the data do
also support the clinician's
uh the advice to us ministers which we
took that the appropriate dosing
regime is 12 weeks apart
in order to save the most lives because
the
um the reduction of hospitalizations by
more than eighty percent is a uh
is a very very good uh very very good
sign
um thank you very much uh sarah next
question is mesa hall
from the express uh thank you very much
secretary of state
uh a question to professor van tam and
dr hopkins about masks
and people in some parts of the world
have taken to wearing two masks
um joe biden has been seen double
masking
i just wanted have you seen any evidence
that suggest double masking is a good
idea and would you recommend it
and uh secretary of state um israel like
the uk has had a very fast
vaccine roll out um but there have been
concerns that significantly fewer people
come forward for a second dose
have you seen a similar thing happening
here and what are you doing to make sure
that people do get the two doses that
they need
thanks very much mesa double masking
so so i think what we know is that the
the more layers you have the better
and so that we recommend at least two
layers in the uk
and ideally three layers in a vaccine a
vaccine
three layers in a mask and that is
really important to reduce the
viral transmission both from you to
others and from others to you
we have got a face masks and face
coverings
advisory group who meet on a regular
basis and look at new and emerging
evidence
and the u.s has looked at some of that
evidence as well
we are in an ongoing discussion about
what to do next but we think
one mask that has more than two layers
in it
is currently effective for the vast
majority of the population
uh thanks very much anything to add
nothing to add on that thank you
on the point about israel um first the
first thing i'd say is that we have seen
this vaccine gap emerging in the israeli
data
as well and it's very reassuring to see
the same
uh impressive results from the from the
vaccine
in israel as well as uh now here in the
uk
uh in terms of second doses um i have
heard those
reports that you refer to we haven't
seen that sort of
um reticence here and it is absolutely
vitally important as we come up to the
week mark since margaret keenan received
her first jab on the 8th of december
and so the number of people coming for a
second second jab
is going to start to rise as we go
through this month
and we've got all the supplies to
deliver that and everybody can have
confidence that
uh the uh the jab will be there ready
and waiting for them when they
go forward for their uh for their second
vaccination
but obviously coming forward for the uh
for the
uh the second jab is a very very
important part of this program
because while the first jab gives you
this uh
this excellent protection that we're
seeing in the data that we're publishing
today
uh the data also show that for the
pfizer jab which is the only one
that we have the data for you get yet
further protection from the second jab
so um you should not just come forward
for the first job which people are
doing in in droves and the numbers the
uptake figures are
spectacular but it is very important
that people come forward
for their second jab when they're asked
to as well by the nhs anything you'd
like to have professor van tan
thank you um i'd just like to say that
um
the the human immune system is really
incredibly complex and there are some
you know immunologists who are much
cleverer than i who are still
trying to get to the bottom of it and
probably the next generation of
immunologists after them will still be
trying to get to the bottom of it
but i think there's quite a significant
likelihood
that a second dose of vaccine is going
to
mature your immune response possibly
make it broader
and almost certainly make it longer
than it would otherwise be in relation
to a first
dose only so whilst our policy is
absolutely and without apology or
reservation
been to pursue first dose is the
priority
for as many people as possible and
inevitably
the consequence of that is that the
second day
doses are delayed somewhat
it is absolutely critical that they are
still
part of the course of immunization
against covid19
and no less important for that reason
thanks very much thanks very much mesa
um the final question
is from jill lawless at ap jill
thank you very much um a question for
you uh the health
secretary um i wonder what you thought
about the eu's
plan uh for what they're calling a uh
digital vaccination
green pass essentially a vaccination
a vaccine passport um the uk's called
for international coordination on on
getting international travel going again
is that
a useful idea and is it something
britain might want to sign up to
um and then just one for everyone the um
the road maps easing the lockdown in
england starts in a week's time when uh
when children go back to class um and
then it proceeds in a
number of steps i wondered which step
you're the most concerned about
uh thanks very much jill so we are
absolutely working with our
international partners on
the any need for certification
in terms of having had a vaccine to be
able to travel to another country
because if another country wants to say
that you need to have been vaccinated
with a recognized vaccine to travel
there we want to enable
brits to be able to to take that journey
so we are working with international
partners and the eu is part of those
discussions
um as are several other
countries around the world and it's um
it's obviously important work and what
i'd also say is that in a sense
this already exists because you need to
have a test
before you can travel to the uk and as
far as i understand it from the
details set out today uh the eu proposal
is that it is
that certification includes both whether
you've had the vaccine and also whether
you've recently
had a test for those who can't get
vaccinated yet
um which is obviously uh particularly
important
um i i i i therefore it's
it's it's something that we're working
with them
and others on um and it matters that we
get the details of this right
for international travel um and on the
question
on the roadmap um what i'd say in
response to your question
is that we have set out the tests
precisely so
we can be we can be sure
that the data still allow
for the safe step down
the road map and i'm highly confident
that the opening of schools on monday
is the right thing to do and the data
point that way and then we will assess
the data
before taking step two the the roadmap
is designed
to be able to see the data before we
take each step
and so we've done it in that way in
order to
be able to have the assurance that we
are taking
a cautious yet irreversible path out of
this
pandemic dr hopkins anything to add on
that well i would agree
i think the thing that we know is that
children going back to school and each
point
is likely to increase interactions with
others and therefore
we are likely to see an increase in the
ore number and potentially more
transmissions
what we need to do is give time after
each of the events
to monitor the impact of that not just
on cases in the community
but particularly on hospital admissions
and deaths which is what
we see that the vaccines are preventing
and what would prevent
surges in hospitalizations and therefore
a big impact
so we'll need to monitor the cases after
each step and that's going to be really
important
thank you secretary of state at the risk
of sounding like a parrot
i'm not worried about any particular
step
i am far more worried that there is time
to consider the effect of each step
before we move on to the next one
and that way we get into a process
where we are hopefully with vaccines
relaxing in a very long-term way and we
don't have to go backwards and forwards
and backwards and forwards
in these cases and we'll leave the
coronavirus briefing there from
downing street
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news